Introduction

Edge detection is one of the discoveries in the early stages of vision processing when features of images are identified to predict the properties and structures of objects in a scene. Computer vision processing has evolved over the year with applications in various aspect of our life, including diagnostic imaging. Edges are the significant change in the intensity of the neighbouring pixel in an image which indicates discontinuity, which could either be a step or line discontinuities (Ramesh et al., 1995). The intensity change in an image is captured with gradient as the image transposes into an array of pixels with 256 grey levels that range from 0 to 255. The gradient measures the change in image grey level with either horizontal direction to detect vertical edges or vertical direction for horizontal edges or even a combination of both directions. This report delineates the edge detection concepts and operators deployed in the edge detection application built with MATLAB App Designer.


The Edge Detection Application

The edge detection application presents an edge function to detect edges in preloaded images which include Cameraman, Flamingos, Kids, Ilama, Moon, Peacock, Peppers and Rice, and allow the user to upload an image with the option to have the detected edges in Black and White, Red, Green or Blue colour. The application also provides for the use of five edge detectors which are Sobel, Prewitt, Roberts, Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) and Canny operators.

My Edge Detection (Edge Function): The edge function applies to the greyed image a diagonal gradient detection which combines both the horizontal and vertical gradient images into a gradient image outlining the edges. The derivative filter that is applied on the images to detect the edges is G[ƒ[i,j]] = |ƒ[i,j] - ƒ[i+1,j+1]| + |ƒ[i,j+1] - ƒ[i+1,j]| where j represents the x-direction and the i represents negative y-direction. It starts from the initial cell (-1,1) and iterates through the entire image rows and columns (pixel grid) in an interpolated fashion.

Sobel Edge Detection (Sobel Operator): The Sobel Operator is one of the first-order derivative operators, and it detects edges in an image where the magnitude of the gradient is high. It is less sensitive to vertical and horizontal edges than it is to the diagonal edges (Ramesh et al., 1995; Smitha and Baburaj, 2018).
Prewitt Edge Detection (Prewitt Operator): The Prewitt Edge is also a first-order derivative operator, and it detects edges where the directional gradient is highest in the image intensity gradient. The operator is very sensitive to noise though it is easy to implement (sha et al., 2015).
Roberts Edge Detection (Roberts Operator): The Roberts Edge Operator is yet another first-order derivative operators used in the edge detector application. It uses diagonal edge gradients similar to the implemented edge function. The edge operator is very effective to detect edges in binary images and do not consider the edge orientation, thus susceptible to fluctuations. (Alam et al., 1993; Ramesh et al., 1995)

Laplacian of Gaussian Edge Detection (LoG Operator): The Laplacian of Gaussian Operator is a second derivative operator. It combines the Gaussian filter to smoothen the image and reduce the noise and uses a linear interpolation of the subpixel resolution to locate the edges. The operator uses blob and zero crossings (inflexion points) to detect edges, unlike the first-order derivative operators that use gradient magnitude (Ramesh et al., 1995). 

Canny Edge Detection (Canny Operator): While the Canny Edge Operator is also a first-order derivative operator, the operator apply the Gaussian filter to reduce noise and smoothen the images. The operator uses the nonmaximal suppression to the values of the image gradient magnitude with double thresholding algorithm to link and detect edges. It also produces line tracing in edge detection (Saklani and Verma, 2019).


Conclusion

The Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) and Canny edge detection operators outperformed the other three edge detection operators. The first-order derivative operators are generally sensitive to noise as differentiation tends to amplify noise. The Laplacian of Gaussian seems to consistently have a high performance in detecting the edges in all of the sample images with reduced noise. However, it is imperative to note the trade-off between the strength of edge detection and noise reduction. The Canny edge detection operator detects more edges than the LoG operator but with a few false edges. The Canny edge detection operator could be tuned to perform better with the double thresholding algorithm to reduce the number of noise fragments.
